---
sort: 1
---
## dadaist2
**dadaist2** - a shell wrapper for DADA2, to detect representative sequences and
generate a feature table starting from Illumina Paired End reads. 
This is the main program of the _dadaist2 toolkit_ that includes several
wrappers and utilities to streamline the analysis
of metabarcoding reads from the Linux shell to R.

## Author
Andrea Telatin <andrea.telatin@quadram.ac.uk>

## Synopsis
    dadaist2 [options] -i INPUT_DIR -o OUTPUT_DIR

## Parameters
## Main Parameters

- _-i_, _--input-directory_ DIRECTORY

    Directory containing the paired end files in FASTQ format, gzipped or not.

- _-o_, _--output-directory_ DIRECTORY

    Output directory (will be created). 
    It is recommended recomment using a new directory for each run.

- _-d_, _--database_ DATABASE

    Reference database in gzipped FASTA format. 
    Optional (default: skip) but highly recommended.

- _-m_, _--metadata_ FILE

    Metadata file in TSV format, first column must match sample IDs. 
    If not supplied a template will be autogenerated using `dadaist2-metadata`.

- _-t_, _--threads_ INT

    Number of threads (default: 2)

- _--primers_ FOR:REV

    Strip primers with _cutadapt_, supply both sequences separated by a colon.

- _-j_, _--just-concat_

    Do not try merging paired end reads, just concatenate. 

- _--fastp_

    Perform the legacy "fastp" QC

- _--no-trim_

    Do not trim primers (using fastp). 
    Equivalent to `--trim-primer-for 0 --trim-primer-rev 0`.

- _--force_

    Will overwrite output folder if it already exists, and will
    attempt to produce MicrobiomeAnalyst and Rhea folders even when
    DADA2 filters too many reads.

- _--dada-pool_

    Pool samples in DADA2 analysis (experimental)

## Input reads

We recommend to prepare a polished directory of input reads having
filenames like Samplename\_R1.fastq.gz and Samplename\_R2.fastq.gz.

Filename starting by numbers are not accepted.

- _-1_, _--for-tag_ TAG

    Tag to recognize forward reads (default: \_R1)

- _-2_, _--rev-tag_ TAG

    Tag to recognize reverse reads (default: \_R2)

- _-s_, _--id-separator_ CHAR

    Character separating the sample name from the rest of the filename (default: \_)

## Metabarcoding processing

- _--trunc-len-1_ and _--trunc-len-2_ INT

    Position at which truncate reads (forward and reverse, respectively).

- _-q_, _--min-qual_ FLOAT

    Minimum average quality for DADA2 truncation (default: 28)

- _--no-trunc_

    Do not truncate reads at the end
     (required for non-overlapping amplicons, like ITS)

- _--maxee1_, and _--maxee2_ FLOAT

    Maximum Expected Errors in R1 and R2, respectively (default: 1.0 and 1.5)

- _--trunc-qual_ FLOAT

    DADA2 truncate quality (default: 10)

- _-s1_, _--trim-primer-for_ INT

    Trim primer from R1 read specifying the number of bases. Similarly
    use `-s2` (`--trim-primer-rev`) to remove the front bases from the
    reverse pair (R2). Default: 20 bases each side.

- _--save-rds_

    Save a copy of the RDS file (default: off)

- _--max-loss_ FLOAT

    After DADA2 run, check the amount of reads globally remaining from input
    to non-chimeric, abort if the ratio is below threshold (default: 0.2)

## Other parameters

- _--crosstalk_ 

    Remove crosstalk using the UNCROSS2 algorithm 
    as described here [https://doi.org/10.1101/400762](https://doi.org/10.1101/400762).

- _-p_, _--prefix_ STRING

    Prefix for the output FASTA file, if "MD5" is specified, the sequence MD5 hash
    will be used instead. Default is "ASV".

- _-l_, _--log-file_ FILE

    Filename for the program log.

- _--tmp-dir_ DIR

    Where to place the temporary directory (default are system temp dir
    or `$TMPDIR`).

- _--skip-tree_

    Do not generate tree. _Experimental|Not recommended_.

- _--skip-plots_

    Do not generate quality plots.

- _--popup_

    Display popup notifications (tested on MacOS and Ubuntu)

- _--quiet_

    Reduce verbosity

- _--verbose_ and _--debug_

    Increase reported information

## Source code and documentation
The program is freely available at [https://quadram-institute-bioscience.github.io/dadaist2](https://quadram-institute-bioscience.github.io/dadaist2)
released under the MIT licence. The website contains the full _DOCUMENTATION_ and we recommend 
checking for updates.

The paper describing Dadaist2 was published in:

Ansorge, R.; Birolo, G.; James, S.A.; Telatin, A. _Dadaist2: A Toolkit to Automate and Simplify Statistical Analysis and Plotting of Metabarcoding Experiments_.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 5309. [https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22105309](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22105309)
